---
title: The Github Effect
tags:
---

Recently I've come across a stretch of similarly themed articles. 
Articles discussing the increasing shift of all business to be 
tech-based. The conclusion for business owners is often the same: *hire 
talented developers*.

I don't disagree. Every business that expects to have any staying power 
whatsoever needs some level of development. If not for their core 
product itself, surely for some sort of web and/or smart-phone presence. 
And for the former, the level of developer talent required to stay 
afloat can be tremendous.

In my opinion, the greatest pool of developer talent is open source 
software projects. The people involved in these projects are doing what 
they love for free. They're good at working alone or as part of a 
distributed team. They use new technologies and champion new techniques 
and Design Patterns. They write maintainable and generalized libraries 
of code to be put on display like the Art that it is. Furthermore, to 
enjoy any level of notoriety in this field, the code has to be 
high-quality.

More and more, companies are realizing that talented developers are the 
intellectual property, not the software they create. Letting your 
talented developers write the software they want --under the licensing 
they want-- is the best way to get great software.

I'd argue that the ridiculous rate of innovation is enough to offset the 
risk of intellectual piracy. If Google were to open source its 
*entirety* right now, could anyone use that as a competitive advantage? 
I say no; Google has the talented engineers to out-innovate any forks or 
clones -- not to mention the huge head-start in terms of how to best 
leverage all that code.

Case in point: The two most [popular][] browsers right now are Firefox 
and Chrome, both just thin layers of branding over fully open versions 
of themselves. Is Google worried that someone will take Chromium's 
source and out-compete? Of course not. There's plenty of derivative 
projects using Webkit and V8 -- while these are great for exploring 
ideas and satisfying niche markets, they make no negative impact on 
Chrome. Quite the opposite; the flourishing ecosystem of buzz and 
patches can only help.

[popular]: http://www.w3schools.com/browsers/browsers_stats.asp

Successful tech start-ups are show-casing the value of the open source 
ecosystem. Companies like [etsy][], [thoughtbot][], and 
[paperlesspost][] open source a ton of their "intellectual property" 
via github. This gains them followers, watchers, end-users, contributers 
and most importantly: something to entice recruits. Whether intentional 
or just the organic outcome of good-natured founders, the strategy 
works.

[etsy]:          https://github.com/etsy
[thoughtbot]:    https://github.com/thoughtbot
[paperlesspost]: https://github.com/paperlesspost

Companies like the one I work for are starting to look at open-source as 
a valuable goal. Regardless of the motivation (the altruistic "giving 
back" or simply building brand recognition), the bottom line is more 
software is let free. Beyond the fact that this is generally good for 
the world, it's good for me to work on such software -- I feel 
unencumbered by licensing or copyrights. I can freely blog about the 
stuff I'm doing and share snippets with interested parties. It's just 
damn easier.

What I'm seeing is people being paid to develop in an open-source 
landscape. Whether using or writing such tools, we are absolutely making 
money with them. I can't tell you how many arguments I've had trying to 
convince people that free software has real monetary value.

We're here -- a world where investors and recruiters are actually 
interested in the number of watchers and followers you have on github.
